USM node clarifications and API generalization (#66)
reble/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_graph.asciidoc

Memory that is allocated by the following functions is owned by the specific
graph. When freed inside the graph, the memory is only accessible before the
`free` node is executed and after the `malloc` node is executed. When a `command_graph` contains

> any nodes that allocate memory, only one executable graph object can be alive at the same time.

Reviewer: This limitation seems like only a limitation in our current POC prototype, so should we be including that in the specification? It should be possible in a more mature implementation for each executable graph to maintain it's own allocations and have those be used in each graph's actual execution I would think. Unless there is something I am missing?

Reviewer 2: A note that CUDA Graphs also has the limitation that if a graph contains a memory allocation node, then only one instantiation of the graph can exist at any point in time.

Reviewer: Hmmm, I suppose if you allow the allocations to be accessed from outside the graph then that creates a problem with more than one instantiation (because then each instantiation can't have different allocations). So if we have to allow that then the limitation makes sense I suppose!

Author: Not only the outside access of allocations is the issue.
Since the pointer is defined outside the graph it would be a shared resource among executable graph objects and its command functions. Unless we change the semantics away from plain pointers such a concurrent access would be leading to undefined behavior when we allow more than one instantiation.

Reviewer: > Not only the outside access of allocations is the issue. Since the pointer is defined outside the graph it would be a shared resource among executable graph objects and its command functions. Unless we change the semantics away from plain pointers such a concurrent access would be leading to undefined behavior when we allow more than one instantiation.

I don't think is necessarily true. At the end of the day the command function is being compiled to an actual device kernel which takes parameters and we can set whatever value for those parameters that we want before submission, typically they will be what has been pulled from the CGF itself but that doesn't have to be the case. Obviously this is not true of the current prototype because we're just reusing the CGF but as documented in the issues this has many limitations already. 

One caveat though actually is that this probably isn't true for `host_task`s when we eventually support them, since it's likely just re-running the actual host lambda/function so would use captured values directly. In theory I suppose the compiler could output information about host task functions in the integration header and then we could tinker with them, though I'm not a compiler person, and even then modifying a lambda in this way is probably not allowed or at the very least highly discouraged.

Reviewer: Another point Re: the discussion about device only allocations inside a graph, although it's safe to say that user couldn't do anything with a device only pointer on the host inside a `host_task` they could actually use it for interop with the backend and so at that point each graph having it's own device allocations would be very problematic as described here.

I think on balance then if we want to support allocation nodes then the single executable graph restriction makes a lot of sense. Feel free to mark this comment as resolved if there's no further discussion to be had!

[source,c++]
----
using namespace ext::oneapi::experimental;
template <typename T>
node 

> add_malloc(T*& data, size_t count, sycl::usm::alloc kind, const property_list& propList = {});

Reviewer 2: I think we may need exception behaviour for when the device doesn't support the requested USM kind, however this may need to be in finalize as it's at that point we know what device we're targetting

Reviewer 2: I'm actually curious how we can return a device USM pointer here, when we don't know what device we're targetting at this point in time.

Author: The allocation won't happen before at least the executable graph object is created. That is when the context is know.

Reviewer 2: That make sense, but what does it mean for the `data` return parameter? Would it be set to a placeholder for that USM allocation since we haven't done the allocation yet?  I think we'll need some wording to let the user know what valid usage of the value returned in `data` is, e.g CUDA graphs says - "When [cudaGraphAddMemAllocNode](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__GRAPH.html#group__CUDART__GRAPH_1g6fc8b917f0d8047f573c786d9465185d) creates an allocation node, it returns the address of the allocation in nodeParams.dptr. The allocation's address remains fixed across instantiations and launches."

```cpp
command_graph g;
float* foo = nullptr;
g.add_malloc<float>(foo, sycl::usm::alloc::device, n); // is foo set by this call to a placeholder?
auto node_i = g.add([&](sycl::handler& h) {
    h.parallel_for(n, [=](sycl::id<1> it){
      const size_t i = it[0];
      foo[i] = 3.14;
    });
}
auto exec_graph = g.finalize(q.get_context()); // Do the USM allocation
q.memset(foo, 42.0, sizeof(float);   // does foo still point to the placeholder?
sycl::free(foo, q.get_context());
```

Reviewer 2: I've just realized that a context could contain multiple devices, so we won't know which one to create the device allocation for at graph finalization time.

Looking at the core SYCL `sycl::malloc` & `sycl::free` USM functions, they either take a `sycl::context` & `sycl::device` or a `sycl::queue`, maybe `add_malloc` and `add_free` could do the same.

However, I'm now starting to think this discussion is now touching on aspects of the [multi-device graph concept](https://github.com/reble/llvm/issues/7). i.e should we do something like just pass a context when we create the modifiable graph, and then have a parameter (queue or device) when creating the individual nodes to specify the exact device.

----

> |Adding a node that encapsulates a memory allocation operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Adding a node that encapsulates a USM allocation operation.
```

So that it's clear what the valid usage of this pointer is

* `data` - Return parameter set to the address of memory allocated.

* `count` - Number of elements of type `T` to allocate.

> * `kind` - Specifies the type of USM to allocate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `kind` - Specifies the type of USM to allocate.
```

* Throws synchronously with error code `invalid` if a queue is recording
  commands to the graph.
  
* Throws synchronously with error code `invalid` if the pointer has already freed

>   or is an invalid address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Throws synchronously with error code `invalid` if the pointer has already been freed
  or is an invalid address.
```

and the executable graphs created from them) or until the buffer is no longer
required by the graph (such as after being replaced through executable graph update).

USM allocations are accessible from all nodes that are located after the malloc
and before an (optional) free node. When the execution is in process accessing 

> the memory from anywhere else inside and outside the graph is undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and before an (optional) free node. While the graph is being executed accessing 
the memory from anywhere else inside or outside the graph is undefined behavior.
```

> If the memory is not freed inside a graph, it's the users resposiblity to release 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the memory is not freed inside a graph, it's the user's resposiblity to release 
```

the memory. In that case the memory is accessible after the first execution of
a `command_graph`. When freed inside a graph, all memory is owned by and associated

> to the lifetime of one specific `command_graph<state::executable>` object.

Reviewer: This seems a bit error prone in that users could add allocation nodes but never free the memory. I assume the intention is so that a graph can write some values to a shared allocation which is visible on the host as well, and since the memory isn't freed by the graph it can be accessed after execution on the host. However at that point wouldn't it make more sense for the user to just allocate the memory themselves outside of the graph and handle both allocation and freeing? Alternatively if we support memcpy as a node of the graph they can copy out to some memory that they manage themselves on the host.

I think the wording is also confusing because if there is a free node inside the graph the lifetime of the memory is tied to the execution of the graph not the executable object itself. In practice yes we'd likely not actually do a free to reuse the memory but this wording seems to guarantee that the memory lives until the destruction of the graph itself. This could lead users to think they can access the memory as long as the graph is alive.

Reviewer 2: A note that from [cudaGraphAddMemAllocNode ](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-runtime-api/group__CUDART__GRAPH.html#group__CUDART__GRAPH_1g6fc8b917f0d8047f573c786d9465185d) that there is similar behaviour in adding alloc nodes that don't need to be freed in the graph 

> If the allocation is not freed in the same graph, then it can be accessed not only by nodes in the graph which are ordered after the allocation node, but also by stream operations ordered after the graph's execution but before the allocation is freed.

Reviewer: That's a fair point, I think the wording could still be improved in this case though.

> If the memory is not freed inside a graph, it's the user's resposiblity to release 
> the memory. In that case the memory is accessible after the first execution of
> a `command_graph`. When freed inside a graph, all memory is owned by and associated
> to the lifetime of one specific `command_graph<state::executable>` object.

Author: ```suggestion
If the memory is not freed inside a graph, it's accessible outside a graph and the user
has the responsibility to release memory. Accessing memory before related
`command_graph<state::executable>` object is created or while it's being executed
is undefined behavior. When freed inside a graph, memory is internal to related
`command_graph<state::executable>` object. Access of nodes connected in the DAG before 
related `malloc` and after related `free` node is undefined behavior.
```

> When the executable graph is executed again the underlying memory might be reused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the executable graph is executed again the previously allocated memory may be reused.
```
